---
title: Memory, forgetting, PKD and blogs
categories:
- books
- memory
- culture
layout: post
---

(from sept 2006)

(This is an old article from sept 2006 which never got published because I was
too lazy.  I think it's still relevant, so I'll post it now, slightly edited.
Twitter makes a case in point.)

I've lately been trying to find some interesting
scientific/culture-studies-type-of books on memory, more specifically on how
individuals or groups of people live and experience reality, then collectively
remember or forget only to relive (often nostalgic) the "same" reality again
later through memories.

There seemingly exist very few accessible and interesting books on this
subject. Recommendations?

I'll stick to the works of Philip K. Dick for the moment, whose book "A Scanner
Darkly" was recently made into a film by Richard Linklater. He emphasised the
importance of memory on what we see as reality (the idea is that we often have
'false' memories).

Words, images, films have the power to capture the moment, in very different
ways, taking away some of the subjectivity of our memories. All blogs taken
together ("blogosphere"), can be seen as a collective and interlinked memory
made available to everyone.

In a Discovery article written a year ago, Steven Johnson mentions the
evolution of photography from a complicated chemical process to a commonplace
technology as an important step towards the creation of a visual collective
memory. Johnson then goes on to show how Gordon Bell from Microsoft tries to
capture and archive as much as possible of his life digitally in a project
called [MyLifeBits](http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=a-digital-life/).  For
life, 1TB free hard disk recommended.

Now, imagine a fully networked society in which each individual captures their
own life plus that of their friends.

The (recent) past, neatly categorised in decades, often evokes stereotypical
images.  We somehow "know" or imagine how it must have been, through books,
photos, films, our own memories or memories of other people. Now if we could
just look at a snapshot of the past?

Last weekend I was looking at some old family photos, my grand-grand parents,
fading away in black and white.  In 100 years (web X.0?) we (or the following
generations) will be looking at flickr, more specificallyat the snapshot of it
taken at the beginning of the 21st century.
